---
title: Teaching philosophy for majors course in physics

excerpt: Education policy often focuses on HOW to teach, but more attention must be paid to WHAT to teach

categories: 
- physics  
- philosophy

layout: name
---

**Don't Panic.  You can do this.  I can help.**  

That's my laugh-line intro to my non-majors courses, where the students
usually bring a heavy load of terror into the classroom.  But I actually
think it's an important reminder in courses for physics majors too,
even though most of them have already gotten over the initial hurdles
of intrinsic interest in and fear of the material.  One reason is
that a lot of the students who choose physics have been told their entire
lives that they are very smart.  Recent studies in educational psychology
have shown that messages like that, while well-intended as confidence
boosters, often have the opposite effect.  "Being smart" is not something
the student has any control over - it just is, or isn't.  And
since most people are their own worst critics, many of these "smart" kids
actually carry a heavy load of fear that they are only one blown test
or one fumbled in-class question away from everyone finding out they aren't
so smart after all.  These students, just like I was, are terrified of 
being exposed as a fraud.  Sometimes this makes us study harder, but it also
sometimes makes us extremely hesitant to take risks.

Now a typical smart kid can often get by alright on talent, studying,
and avoiding failure-prone situations, because, honestly, who's going
to worry about the kid that's always doing their homeowrk?  But I
believe that failure is an essential part of real learning and
progress.  As students, and especially as scientists (who are just a
particular kind of student, after all), we *need* to fail, sometimes
spectacularly, if we are ever to discover where the edges of our
knowledge really are.  Sure, if humanity already understood everything
there is to know about the universe, then learning would solely be
about the transmission of knowledge from teacher to student, and
failure would be a shameful weakness to be stamped out or hidden.  But
we don't understand everything.  There is, thankfully, much still
to learn, and failure exposes our weaknesses and shows us
the ragged edge of our ignorance, giving us an opportunity to 
put our attention in the right direction.

In my own case, I chose the most intense, high
pressure undergraduate college I could find, and ended up having a
*miserable* time finding out over the course of four years just how
much smarter than me most physicists are.  But the experience
taught me, brutally, how to have real empathy for a struggling
student; later, working with high school and college students, I
learned that the process of figuring out how best to teach a topic
to a student, where the prospect of failure was real and immediate,
 was the best possible way for me to learn the topic
in the depth required to work as a "real" scientist.



Most of my teaching experience has been at the high school level,
where the students have long since been taught abject terror of math
and science, and at the introductory college level, where the
non-major students show even greater fear of the material.  I regard
it as one of my life missions to help such students get through what
many will later regard as the most challenging intellectual experience
of their careers, and on the other side to walk away with (1) a
conceptual understanding of physics as an approach to understanding
the universe, and (2) the confidence to apply that conceptual
understanding to situations beyond the classroom.

In an increasingly specialized world, not everyone can push back the
boundaries of human knowledge in physics, and it is unreasonable to
orient our non-major courses as if they should.  But we can prepare
students to understand where the challenges are and to understand the
process of formulating answers to these challenges.  That will
facilitate a citizenry that is empowered to make decisions with an eye
to the long-term future.  For example, humanity will soon be faced
with difficult decisions about the best way to deal with climate
change.  While economics, politics, and personal philosophy will play
a large role in these decisions, basic understanding of physics will
enable citizens to understand the terms of the debate and contribute
to it meaningfully.

To accomplish this in the classroom I take a learning-centered
approach: nothing is sacred but the ultimate goal of enabling student
learning.  If it works, I will use it.  If it doesn’t work, I’ll get
rid of it.  This requires rigorous attention to assessment, so we can
tell what works; complete openness about what we are doing and why
(surprise guests are always welcome in my classes); and an eye out for
the results of educational research, to help identify and substantiate
new and old best practices.

Currently, I find that what works is to remove myself from the center
of attention as much as possible (in a class in which the teacher is
the only one *doing* anything, the teacher is the only one *learning*
anything); to use realistic projects as frameworks for learning
(students learn best when new knowledge is contextualized and when
they take ownership of the process); to make focused use of
demonstrations as a source of perplexing questions to be answered (to
model the scientific process); guided examples to demonstrate my own
approach and passion for the material; and to keep a careful watch for
common misconceptions that students often take away from new concepts.


[research]: ../work/
[published]: ../work/pubs
[personal]: ../
[code]: ../code/

