---
title: Tinkering 

excerpt: Tinkering good.  Random fussing bad. 
comments: true

categories:
- teaching

tags:
- teaching
- testing
- lab

layout: iem-post
---

I'm trying a bit of an experiment with my new lab classes this term.  This is
the first time we've had dedicated lab time for the physics courses (three
hours per week in lab, with 4 hours in "lecture", separate grades for each), so
I get to start from scratch.

I really don't see the point of the classic teaching lab, ie the *let's verify
something that we all know is true by following the recipe, inevitably finding
a value that is ~10% different from the "accepted value", and then blame the
whole thing on ourselves with the useless term "human error" rather than
reflecting on the inevitable mismatch between the hopes and reality of an
experimental design*.

Just writing that out, I think I finally understand why students are so
insistent on blaming everything on "human error" -- in that classic setup, the
recipe is preset, the only contribution they are making is in performing the
specified steps.  Since they presume the infallibility of the recipe("Newton
MUST have been right!"), any deviation from the "accepted value" must be due to
their own mistakes.  

If you are making Julia Child's Beef Bourguignon, and the dinner doesn't come
out so well, you don't blame Julia Child -- you blame your own execution.  

On the other hand, if you are tinkering in the kitchen with no instructions,
you don't blame yourself if it comes out dry -- you say, "I've almost got it
figured out, just a few more tweaks *I'll get it better next time by doing
XXXXXX*."

Tinkering frees you from slavery to the recipe, enough to form theories about
what worked and what didn't, and thus to iteratively improve the design of the
experiment *as long you have some idea of what to expect*.  You can iteratively
improve a Beef Bourguignon recipe if you have no idea what it should taste
like.  You can't improve your experimental design if you had no expectations of
what you would see.

So I let my students free to tinker, but only AFTER they have proposed a model
of the phenomenon in question, and stated clearly (at least verbally) exactly
what they expect to see.  Without the hypothesis clearly stated, they're not
even tinkering -- they're just futzing around.

Luckily, I'm blessed with a really cool group of gadget-freaks for students
this term.




