---
title: One Week Down

excerpt: Long first week, highlighted by some fun physical graphing
comments: true

categories:
- teaching

layout: iem-post
---

I'm one week into the fall term and one thing is already absolutely clear:
teaching three lecture sections  in a row is brutal.

My Tuesday-Thursday schedule runs from 11:30 - 5:45, with 3 different classes,
Quantitative Analysis, General Physics I, and Physics II running 2 hours each.
My energy is just a little bit low by the middle of the third class.  On the
other hand, the Monday-Wednesday schedule is sweet, with just one lab
each afternoon. 

Even though the level of the two physics classes is very different (algebra
based with sophomores vs. calculus based with juniors and seniors), this week's
material is basically the same, as I'm reviewing kinematics with the upper
class as a way to teach calculus to the ones who are in it right now
(co-requisite).  I had them do "graphing stories", creating graphs to represent
my motion and discussing the relationships between the different
representations they came up with, and then to create graphs which a partner
had to act out.  Most of them naturally used the distance vs. time
representation, but a few went to velocity vs. time, and others used more
exotic techniques:  

<img class='inset middle' src='/images/20120906_motion_graph.jpg' title='Cool displacement graph' alt='Cool displacement graph' width='400px' />

The half-filled circles are there to indicate which direction the mover is
facing -- the dark half is to the back of the head.  One of the students came
up with it and the rest adopted it and expanded it.  There was even one with
the circle rotated, to indicate that the mover should have their head twisted
around opposite the direction their body was facing.  Pretty cool stuff.

The goal had been to get them to experiment with the relationship between the
displacement and velocity graphs, in the advanced class so we can talk about
derivatives, and in the intro class so we can use the kinematic equations.  I
think that was pretty successful -- and fun ("You mean the slope of that graph
gives the curve for that graph??"), but the most effective part was when they made their partners jump around like chickens, and they started arguing about what it really meant if a displacement or velocity graph changed discontinuously.  

That would make a fun test -- we'll see how they do on the first quiz next week.



