---
title: Newtown 
excerpt: 
comments: true

categories: politics, sorrow
- 

layout: iem-post
---

I've changed my mind.

I think we should take all the guns away, melt them down for scrap, and turn them into garden implements.  Maybe it doesn't speak well of my strength of character, but this one -- this one has gotten to me in a way the others didn't.  I have kids now, and somehow that changes it.

You see, I like the Bill of Rights.  I really, really think it is an awesome thing.  I am proud of it.  It makes me proud, as an American, in a way that few other things do anymore, as I've gotten more liberal and more skeptical.  I am also proud of a few other amendments, and wish that they had been adopted sooner, and I would be a good deal prouder if a few pieces of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were added to it, but, you know, we're working on that.

So I've accepted the argument that the 2nd amendment is fundamentally about the
right of rebellion.  That it is the less stirring (and more official) version
of Jefferson's "whenever any government becomes destructive of those ends, it
is the right of the people to alter or abolish that government, and to
institute new government..."

If you accept that form of the 2nd amendment, the NRA makes a little more sense. It's not about filling deer with obscene numbers of bullets, it's about preparing for a day when the government has "become destructive of those ends".  I've never really liked guns, or been particularly comfortable with having them around, but I supported the idea of it being okay for private citizens to have them.

But the world has moved on.  The kinds of firearms a private citizen can hold are about as relevant in a revolution today as a fly swatter.  Which is to say, they might have some use, but they are not what's going to turn the tide of war.  Have you seen what a Predator drone, armed with missiles, can do?  

A modern revolution will not be won with small arms.  It will be won with heavy artillery, high explosives, courage, and the support of greater nations who will enforce no-fly zones with fighter jets -- as in Libya, and perhaps in Syria.  Or with a can of gasoline, a lighter, and desperation as in Tunisia, or it will be won with no arms at all and Twitter, as in Egypt.

The handgun, as a practical weapon of rebellion, has been left to the scrapheap.  It's only remaining use, apparently, is symbolic -- a people with the right to hold weapons is a "free" people.

Well I no longer see the point of taking a symbolic stand with no practical benefit, when the costs are so obvious, and so, so high.  It is too freaking easy to get weapons that have no purpose but murder, and which make it easy to slaughter dozens before anyone can react.  

Suppose we re-interpreted the 2nd amendment so it protected the right to bear tools that might actually make a difference in a rebellion against an abusive government, but which would not make mass slaughter such a horrifically common event... what might those tools be?  All I've got is the right to encrypt communications using a protocol of my own choosing.


